[Music]
good afternoon welcome to viral adji I'm
Vincent rockin yellow and I am going to
be your professor for this entire course
I am a professor up at the Medical
School I have had a lab there for 38
years working on viruses and I think
they are the coolest things on the
planet cooler than anything else that
exists and part of my goal is to
convince you that they're really amazing
I absolutely love viruses I have a
passion for them that few people have
and I want to impart some of that to you
now as a professor out of medical school
I have zero teaching obligations I don't
have to teach this course I've been
doing this for 10 years because I want
you down here on this campus to know
about viruses when I started doing this
10 years ago there was no virology
course at Morningside and I thought you
guys are paying 60 grand a year and
you're not learning about viruses this
is completely unacceptable so that's my
motivation and I guarantee it you're
gonna really like this course you're
going to like what you learn it's not
easy but in the end you're going to know
more about viruses than most people on
earth and this is a great time to be
taking this course because as you know
we have a brand new virus emerging from
China and circulating around the globe
and everything you have heard about it
on Twitter and Facebook and so forth is
probably wrong but here you're going to
get the facts by the end of this course
you're going to understand exactly what
is going on here's what I feel if you
want to understand life if you want to
understand human health and human
disease you need to know about viruses
we live and prosper in a literal cloud
of viruses viruses infect every living
thing on the planet everything nothing
escapes a virus infection
we regularly eat and breathe in billions
of virus particles probably on a daily
basis and viral genomes are part of our
genome as well they're truly per most
pervasive they're everywhere and what is
really remarkable is the extent of
viruses on the planet and here's one
example in the waters of the planet just
the oceans saltwater there are over 10
to the 30th bacteria phages these are
viruses that infect bacteria 10 to the
30th that is too big for you to really
comprehend so here let me put it two
ways for you first of all and a teaspoon
of sea water there are a couple of
million virus particles so next time you
go swimming in the ocean and you spit
water at your friend you're aerosolizing
virus it's completely harmless but their
virus is in there a bacteriophage
particle weighs about a femp 2 gram so
if we multiply that times 10 to the 30th
we get more biomass by a thousandfold of
old elephants on earth so now you're
starting to see how many particles there
are and then if we put them end to end
each of those 10 to the 30th particles
they reach a hundred million light years
into space that's farther than the
nearest galaxy way beyond our solar
system of course incredibly flowing
distance and these are things you can't
even see that's the amazing part there's
so many of them and this is just in the
oceans and in this course we're gonna
talk a bit about the impact of those
viruses on the oceans and on globo
global biogeochemistry they have
enormous roles to play so the numbers is
part of the way viruses are successful
whales for example are infected with
members of a family of viruses called
calluses these are members these are
related to the viruses that can give you
gastroenteritis we'll be talking about
that later in the course
gas
our itis is vomiting and diarrhea we've
all had it these are some viruses that
commonly cause that they can also infect
whales they can cause rashes and
blisters and also gastroenteritis not
just in whales but other marine mammals
some of these whale viruses we think may
infect humans spillover from animals
into humans that's a word I will use a
lot in this course and these whales
excrete 10 to the 13th virus particles a
day in their feces that's a lot of virus
particles going into the ocean there are
lots of whales out there and whales
aren't the only ones in fact this is
just another example of the viral
numbers game if you will and that's a
Khaleesi virus particle in its glorious
color of course these viruses are not
colored at all we color them because it
looks good at its informative but as
you'll see later we know lots of very
detailed structures of virus particles
that we can use to understand how they
work it's a little bit more about the
oceans here's a set of pie charts
showing you the amount of virus is
relative to protists and prokaryotes so
on the Left we have by biomass and you
can see the yellow is the prokaryotes
the bacteria largely they constitute
most of the biomass in the ocean there's
lots of microbial activity in the ocean
in fact it accounts for most of the
oxygen that we're breathing the
photosynthetic bacteria in the oceans
and viruses in blue just a very small
part of the biomass however we if we now
look at particle number that's on the
right or abundance viruses constitute 94
percent of the particles in the ocean if
you just count a bacterium and a virus
as one each
now viruses win the race they are more
abundant in particles than anything else
and these viruses are not just bad news
someone famously said years ago a virus
is a bit of bad news wrapped in a
protein I think that's completely wrong
sometimes it can be but as we'll see
later in the oceans these
viruses are responsible for recycling of
a great deal of the organic matter to
make it available so they have great
roles to play and I just want to again
point out in a leader of coastal water
there's more virus particles than people
on earth and as you'll see they have the
greatest genetic diversity on the planet
nothing comes close to having the number
of genes in toto that viruses have
another sobering number at this point in
time today there are about ten to the
sixteenth genomes of HIV human
immunodeficiency virus on the planet
it's also a huge number and we know this
because we know how many people are
infected about 37 million currently we
know how many genomes they typically
have so we can do the math for it very
easily but what does the number actually
mean it means that for all the drugs we
have to treat HIV we have over 40 and
they're very effective and now if you
are infected with the virus you can live
a life without getting disease because
of these drugs yet within these ten to
the sixteenth genomes there exists
resistance to all of them already
because as you'll see mutations arise
randomly and so no matter how many drugs
we make against this particular virus
there will always be resistance out
there and that's a problem which we'll
talk about when we talk about AIDS how
many of you right now have a virus
infection raise your hand I guess you
don't want to identify right I
understand that but you all do you're
all infected I don't mean to single
anyone out I am infected in fact we all
have right now about a dozen different
herpes viruses in us including herpes
simplex one in two varicella-zoster
virus chickenpox virus although if
you're vaccinated you might have avoided
that one cytomegalovirus epstein-barr
virus and then other herpes viruses six
seven and eight serological studies have
shown the u.s. over 90% of the
population has these viruses and then
once you get them you can't get rid of
them I like to say
unlike love herpes is forever it's true
and we will talk about why they stick
with you
and why you can't ever get rid of them I
have to say I have an Instagram account
where I put pictures of viruses and so
forth and I regularly get notices from
people who say my herpes was cured from
doctor so-and-so let me give you his or
her number it's it's wrong you cannot
cure herpes and you'll learn why in the
herpes lecture so we each have at least
a dozen herpes viruses but we have many
many more as well let me tell you you
know that we have a microbiome right
every part of you has certain bacteria
associated with it your skin your eyes
our respiratory gastrointestinal tract
everywhere there's a different
collection of bacteria that are good
they're beneficial we're just starting
to learn why but there's also viruses in
every part of your body we have a viral
and on the Left our pie chart showing
RNA and DNA viruses and different organ
systems nervous system respiratory
you're a genital tract etc even in
health we have viruses in all these
places all of us if I did a survey of
all of you I would find viruses like
this and over you yet you're fine and
that's the interesting part we think
these are beneficial we have some
evidence for this which we'll touch on
in this course we are currently looking
everywhere for viruses and I want to
play you this movie on the left there we
can now access any anything on the
planet to look for viruses and there I'm
going to show you how to access the
viral of whale breath what they've done
here is they've made a drone which is
piloted by the people on the ship and as
it passes over the whales a little dish
opens up and it collects whale breath I
don't know if you could catch that it's
pretty quick that little dish coming up
is like a petri dish it opens up the
whale breath goes in one more time
and they can collect it they can bring
it back to the lab sequence it and find
out how many viruses are in whale breath
isn't that something you wanted to know
you could you could use that at a party
you said you know how many viruses there
are in whale breath there are a lot so
we can sample any part of the planet and
we are we'd like to know what's there
just a few weeks ago I saw a paper where
they went up to a glacier in the western
part of China and they dug very deep and
pull that ice cores brought them back to
the lab and thawed them and they find
viruses and these ice cores are 15,000
years old so we can really understand
what's on the planet by doing this kind
of sampling it's quite remarkable I
mentioned at the beginning that we have
viral genomes as part of our DNA and
that's illustrated here on this pie
chart as you know our genome is 3.2
billion bases in length the sequence
many years ago and many genomes are
being sequenced right now because the
cost has dropped substantially the
coding genes are very small as you can
see here only one and a half percent and
there many other sequences that do other
things but I want to point you to this
8.3 percent which is labeled LTR retro
transposons I'm going to talk about
exactly what they are what these are in
a lecture later on but essentially a
good fraction of these are remnants of
retrovirus infections that happened long
before we were Homo sapiens they
happened to our ancestors and they were
passed on down to us and in fact some of
the genes from those retro viruses have
been co-opted over evolution to now have
uses in us some of these protein coding
genes came from retrovirus infections in
fact there are sequences of viruses
littered throughout our genome that are
not shown here and we are wondering what
effects they have are they useful and if
so what are they doing and people are
starting to get interesting results
about that now over the years as you
will see most work on viruses and most
virus discovery is driven by disease
and that's illustrated in this graph
which shows the causes of 2017 global
deaths and you can see the biggest
killer cardiovascular diseases almost 18
million deaths globally in one year and
I've put arrows next to some of the
places where viruses are participating
in here the clearest one is HIV the
causative agent of AIDS of course almost
a million deaths in 2017 but there are
other viruses that may not be obvious to
you for example a lot of hepatitis is
viral so that's up there in the top list
a lot of diarrheal diseases are viral
respiratory diseases as well and so
because of all this this drives a lot of
research on viruses but more and more we
are understanding the role that viruses
play in ecosystems and in beneficial
roles on the planet and so the research
is expanding beyond just a cause of
disease but amazingly despite having all
these viruses around us you have so many
in you and around you the air is full of
them right now you're fine you rarely
get sick you get a cold now and then
maybe you get gastroenteritis if you're
healthy you don't get sick so why is
this let's explore why we don't get
infected by all these viruses and the
first reason is that most of them just
pass through us and here is a result of
a study from supermarkets in Washington
DC where they bought cabbage and brought
it back to the lab and looked for
viruses and they found that each serving
of cabbage would have about ten to the
eighth particles of this particular
virus
it's an insect virus that infects this
caterpillar called the cabbage looper so
if you ever eat coleslaw this virus is
on it if you eat cabbage and even if you
cook it the virus will still be on it
probably be inactive but you will still
be ingesting it but these can't infect
us so they pass right through us
so the lot of the viruses we encounter
can't reproduce in our cells so they
pass through it the same with viruses
that we inhale
that land on our skin on the bottom is a
different study where they looked at
viral RNA sequences in human feces can
easily do this you can collect feces in
sequence it the most common RNA virus is
called pepper mild model virus it's in
ninety percent of specimens so most
people apparently eat peppers I didn't
know this this is a pepper that's
infected with the virus of course if you
saw that in a supermarket you probably
wouldn't buy it but they can also be
infected without showing symptoms and
you'll eat them and these viruses passed
through you they don't infect you and I
get emails pretty regularly because now
you can have your fecal viral analyzed
did you know who's a company that will
do that for you and I get email say oh
my god I have this pepper virus what am
I going to do so I see a doctor
said no you don't have to see anyone
because these viruses don't replicate it
nothing that I ever see is really
pathogenic so that one reason is that
they don't replicate on this many
viruses are good
I call them beneficial viruses and I
have three examples for you on the left
is a grass that lives around the hot
springs in places like Yellowstone
National Park if you've been to any of
those you see hot water spewing up from
where it's heated deep from the earth
and around it there are grasses that are
growing they are thermo tolerant grasses
here's one of them the I can't helium
lannigan OSEM can grow up to 55 degrees
Celsius you can bring this grass in the
laboratory and grow it at 55 degrees and
a number of years ago people found that
this grass is infected with a fungus
this fungus here that's all the little
squiggly lines Kerrville area if you
take the fungus out then the plants
can't grow it
high temperatures anymore so somehow the
fungus is conferring thermo tolerance
but it's even more complicated inside
the fungus is a virus that infects the
fungus and if you have just the fungus
without the virus in the planet doesn't
confer thermal tolerance so the virus
helps is
a 3-way mutualism plant fungus virus
that allows the plant to grow and the
others of course get a place to live
another very cool one on the right I
don't know if you've heard of parasitoid
wasps these are wasps that lay their
eggs in caterpillars and then the eggs
hatch and the new wasps eat the
caterpillar and burst out it's like
alien right basically but this is real
life and what these wasps do when they
put their eggs in they they inject the
virus along with the egg it's called a
paladin of virus and that virus is coded
for in the wasp genome the wasp you know
man codes the viral genes that make up
the protein shell of the virus and then
this virus doesn't replicate in the
caterpillar all it does is produce
proteins that immunosuppressed the
caterpillar so it will not reject the
eggs and the larvae of the wasp so
that's why the virus is put in along
with the wasp eggs so of course this
virus is good for the wasp it's not good
for the caterpillar obviously but
neither is the wasp but another example
of a beneficial arrangement and these
are just two tons of them throughout the
living world examples where we can see
viruses engaged in these kinds of
interactions and they're beneficial in
some way to at least one of the hosts
now you may ask does this happen in
mammals because it happened in us we
don't know if it happens in us if our
viruses are beneficial or not because we
can't experiment on us right weakly
cannot do experiments but one day there
will be broadly acting antivirals like
broadly acting antimicrobials for
bacteria and we will give them to people
under certain conditions and it will get
rid of most of their viral and we'll be
able to see if it's bad or not but in
the meantime we don't know but we do
know in mice this the answer seems to be
yes so here's an experiment where mice
were grown free of bacteria germ-free
mice that's gf and here are conventional
I swear their gut tracks are full of
bacteria the normal microbiome so on the
right is a section of the small
intestine you can see the villi here
conventional mice so they grew up with
with a normal gut microbiome nice villi
and then on the bottom they have stained
for protein C d3 which is a marker of
lymphocytes T lymphocytes and you can
see there are some lymphocytes here now
if you do the same with the mice grown
without bacteria the villi are messed up
you can see their morphologically wrong
and they're not many lymphocytes in
these areas anymore okay so you need a
microbiome to for proper development and
for proper development of the immune
system
the mouse in the middle was infected
with a mouse norovirus that is mouse
norovirus mnv and you can see that some
of the abnormality has been restored not
entirely but it's a little better than
the germ-free but some of the
lymphocytes have come back as well so
apparently this virus is restoring
whatever function it is that the
microbiome provided so these are very
tantalizing experiments there's a lot to
do but they suggest that viruses at
least in a mammal can have a beneficial
role the other reason most of you are
well is that you have a really good
immune system that works most of the
time and most of these viruses that you
inhale if they happen to be able to grow
in you they won't because your immune
system will take care of it now if you
happen to if your immune system is down
let's say you are immunosuppressed if
you have an organ transplant if you have
AIDS you will be immunosuppressed even
measles will immuno suppress you then
the simplest virus infection can be
lethal so that points out the importance
of the immune system and keeping viruses
from growing in us so that's what those
are the some of the reasons why you can
be healthy with all these viruses around
you here's another cool example that I
want to give you it's again a
that infects just about everyone on the
planet
it's a polyomavirus shown there in the
middle and this is interesting it
infects us pretty early in life we
usually get it from our family members
spread via respiratory secretions saliva
aerosols made by talking and so forth
and you get infected then you're
infected for life and if you're healthy
you usually have no symptoms if you are
immunosuppressed at some point in your
life you can develop serious disease but
these viruses can be shed routinely in
respiratory secretions and in urine as
well and some people are secreting
hundred thousand particles per ml in
urine and so I always like to remind you
that when you go into a public restroom
you know every time a toilet flushes it
creates an aerosol I don't want to get
you paranoid but that aerosol is likely
to have the viral of the person who was
just before you and maybe by the end of
this course someone told me this a
couple of years ago they no longer went
outside or ate anything because they
were paranoid I hope you don't end up
the same way anyway these polyomavirus
is because they spread within families
they can be used to to study human
migration and that's what this map is so
the dotted line is the progress of Homo
sapiens Out of Africa into Europe and
Asia and the Americas determined by
genome sequence the black lines are the
migration of Homo sapiens based on
infections with this virus we can tell
different lineages because they each
have a unique polyomavirus as I said it
tends to be spread in families so you
can track movement of families by
looking at what they've been infected
with and you can see it mimics the
movement Out of Africa and even provides
more detail on the migration of humans
than the genome does so again that's a
harmless virus turns out to be useful to
track where people have moved so that's
just a little hint of what's to come
we're going to dive into all of these
topics in great detail in this course
the viruses are amazing it really is a
remarkable subject once one year a
student wrote after the course ended
that every lecture she had something to
tell her roommate about that she didn't
know and I think you'll find the same
thing this year as well
it's a remarkable subject and I want to
emphasize that it's an integrative
science what do I mean it I mean to
understand biology you need to
understand not just viruses but
chemistry biochemistry cell biology
physiology if you want to understand how
viruses spread you have to know a little
sociology certainly epidemiology you
have to know a lot of subjects and in
the course of learning about viruses
here you're going to learn a lot of that
ancillary stuff several students in the
past have told me that studying viruses
made biology makes sense and that's
because it's integrative it really
brings a lot of things together and this
these are my goals for the course I want
to give you a big picture the way this
course is arranged is not by virus if
you go to a lot of colleges and
universities throughout the US you will
find virology courses some of them mimic
this one but others teach by virus
you'll have it influenza lecture herpes
lecture a retrovirus lecture that is the
wrong way to teach an introductory
biology course you're not going to learn
any principles that way all you're going
to know is a collection of facts about
different viruses that's great for a
more advanced course but for an
introductory course you need to know the
principles and that's what I'm going to
teach you if you notice the syllabus
every lectures is for the first 13
lectures or so it's a step in the
replication cycle of a virus we're going
to go through it slowly and then in the
second half of the course explores how
viruses cause disease and we have a cast
of viruses that we're going to come back
to all the time so you don't have to
learn every virus but in the end you're
going to have a great overview of how
viruses work so that's what I mean what
I I want to teach it to you as an
integrative discipline not a collection
of viruses diseases or genes and as I
said earlier you're gonna learn things
that amaze the uninformed and the
informed and and frighten the uninformed
right now there's a lot of fright out
there about this new coronaviruses
because of lack of information now I'm
going to show you how to get that
information in the end and I guarantee
you that in two or three years when
another outbreak occurs you're going to
remember this course and say now I
understand what's going on because of
what you taught us and as I said we're
in a perfect moment now because we have
a new virus circulating and just this
morning I pulled these headlines down to
show you what I'm going to teach you to
be able to do so here on the top you
know they don't go to Wuhan don't leave
Wuhan desirous of course originated at a
fish market in Wuhan and the virus could
mutate and spread further okay and
here's another article China warns virus
could mutate and spread where did all
this come from
came from the National Health Commission
Vice Minister there is the possibility
of viral mutation what you are going to
learn in this course is that this is
wrong there is no possibility of virus
mutation it's already happening viruses
mutate with every reproduction cycle
that corona virus has already mutated
extensively as it goes from one person
to another what they mean of course is
that it will eventually have a mutation
that does something like make it spread
more okay but the distinction is subtle
and the Health Minister doesn't know it
and then the press just picks it up and
amplifies it and that's what you see and
so every outbreak I see their headlines
like this the virus may mutate and from
year to year they do not seem to learn
the fundamentals but you're going to
learn it in this course you're going to
understand why this this statement is
incorrect and
what kind of consequences mutation might
have for viruses in a human population I
guarantee when you see these headlines
in five years you're going to understand
why they're not correct now one of the
things I'm going to do in this course is
to have quizzes as we talk here to give
you a break so you can do this on a
laptop cell phone a tablet whatever you
have that's internet connected you have
to go to Socrative and that's the link
there be socrative.com slash login
student and you'll be asked to log in
the room name is virus what else could
it be right and here is our first quiz
just to make sure it works this is which
statement is true hey all viruses make
us sick and can be lethal be our immune
system can manage most viral infections
see humans are usually infected with one
virus at a time D the press is usually
correct in their virology reporting and
E our immune system cannot handle most
infections which one is true this is not
recorded in any way it doesn't count for
your grade it's just to make sure you're
getting it some of them are
straightforward and you will get others
you won't and then I'll explain it to
you it's a good way to teach the
material to you and at one point in the
near future you will get a hundred
percent but it will take a few lectures
before that happens at least that's been
my experience how'd we do yes we go holy
you already got a hundred percent
that never happened
you must be exceptional yes our museum
can manage most infections that's the
answer that's a good sign for the rest
of the course right so I'll do that
periodically at 3 or 3 or 4 per lecture
just to make sure that you're doing well
so let's now define a virus we're going
to need this definition for the rest of
the course what is a virus I have to
tell you that every year I change this I
struggle to include what we have learned
and the first definition from 10 years
ago that I gave is different from this
one
and this year's definition is an
infectious obligate intracellular
parasite comprising genetic material can
be DNA or RNA often surrounded by a
protein coat and sometimes a membrane
it's kind of a wishy washy definition
there are a lot of qualifications in
there but that's the way it is let's
let's take it apart so infectious I
actually debated dropping that from this
year's definition but I think it's the
important concept it infectious means
the virus can go from host to host and
cell to cell and get in it because an
obligate intracellular parasite means
viruses have to get into cells in order
to reproduce they will not reproduce in
the air or on your skin they have to get
inside of a cell so infectious they move
from cell to cell host or host obligate
they have to get in the cell now
parasite is something that takes
something from another organism and
damages it so taking nutrients is
considered damaging because otherwise
you would have those nutrients and
you'll see many ways that viruses damage
their hosts and you may be confused at
some point we're going to talk about
viruses that infect us without harming
us how can that happen but they're still
taking something because in order for
them to make more virus particles they
have to take something from the host so
it may not be serious or overt damage
DNA or RNA viruses are unique and that
they their genome can be either it's
always the same
for a particular kind of virus so
influenza virus has always have RNA
genomes and herpes viruses always have
DNA genomes but no else nowhere else in
the biological world do we see RNA is
genome and that's very interesting and
we're going to talk about that when we
talk about where viruses came from then
often surrounded by a protein coat well
it turns out that the vast majority of
viruses do have a protein coat I added
this this year because I want to include
as viruses some naked nucleic acid
molecules like this one right here it's
a piece of RNA that's called the viroid
and it infects plants has to get inside
the plant cells it reproduces and moves
within the plant and can cause plant
disease and it was called a viroid
because people didn't think they were
viruses because I didn't have a capsid
the protein shell I don't think that
should be the defining character of a
virus I want to include viroids
in viruses so that's why I have often
surrounded in fact you can see from from
the diagrams here most of these viruses
do have a protein coat and so here on
the lower left this icosahedron particle
that's poliovirus
next to it is adenovirus these are made
of pure protein shells with the nucleic
acid inside we'll learn more about this
as we move on other viruses sometimes
have a membrane so here's a corona virus
right down here it has a lipid membrane
around it which add no and polio viruses
do not so not every virus has a membrane
and many of them here do so that's an
option but most of them will have some
kind of protein code around the nucleic
acid except for these fibroids and we'll
talk about viroids and other naked
nucleic acid virus particles later on
now viruses have to infect cells in
order to reproduce if they don't they
disappear and I'm sure that many virus
lineages have disappeared over billions
of years that they've been around they
can't find a host and
that's the end of them but when we study
viruses we have to also study the host
cell so every solution of the virus
reproductive cycle reveal something
about the host many of the great
discoveries about host cells were found
by using virus infected cells and I'll
point those out to you as we go along
and these are some of course various
hosts for viruses as I said they infect
everything on the planet do you think
there's only one organism well there's
so many species out there you can't
possibly hope to find a virus for each
one because nobody studies them all
right I always learned that there are
more insects in certain areas than we've
ever catalogued
but the only organism for which I'm not
aware of a virus is tetrahymena but I'll
bet there is one and they just haven't
found it for many years C elegans there
were no viruses of C elegans and then
they were found so you just have to look
hard enough so you can study the virus
of any organism and you learn about the
organism as well so mosquitoes can be
infected us of course this is a very
interesting protist that lives in the
ocean it is one of the most numerous
protists in the ocean and there's a
virus that infects it which we will talk
about and these are tulips these are
very prized tulips in Holland they have
stripes and the stripes are caused by a
virus infection and people used to breed
these tulips to make the stripes and
they were unknowingly including the
virus because the virus is what
interrupts the pigmentation it makes
them strike so the other question is our
virus is alive and I have a poll on my
blog here which I just looked at the
other day that about 7,000 people have
taken that you can see it's pretty
evenly split between yes and no and
something in between I don't know what
that would be
you're either living or not and so I've
actually thought about this a lot and I
have an answer to this question and it's
not a simple answer it's embodied on
this slide
so when pee most people think about
virus they think about a particle like
that one on the left at polyomavirus and
that is in no way shape or form the
living it's a protein show with some
nucleic acid in it if it's here on the
table it will sit there forever and not
do anything
you can't reproduce on its own so it
can't be alive it has the capacity to
become living when it gets inside of a
cell kind of like a Spore when you pour
water on it but a spore has many
different energy making systems and so
forth that viruses don't have so I don't
think that's a good analogy so the virus
particle which I call a virion the
infectious virus particle is not living
it can't be but when the virus infects a
cell the infected cell is taken over by
the virus it's now devoted to making
virus particles it's no longer just a
cell it's a virus infected cell and it's
alive so I look at it this way a virus
is an organism with two phases one
that's not living which is the particle
and one that is which is the infected
cell I think that solves the problem but
people usually don't like to part
solutions like this and so it's not
really taken hold but this is has to be
it because they're infected cells
certainly is living in the particle
cannot be the problem is us as I say
when people think of virus they always
think of the particle and not the
infected cell so that's my answer to
that the other thing I want to warn you
here at the onset of this course is
please do not anthropomorphize viruses
it's very easy to do because it makes it
easier to talk about them and if you
read any article in the popular press
about viruses they will have viruses
doing things the virus wants to do this
or the goal of the virus is to do this
they have no goals whatsoever they do
not think they do not employ they do not
insure exhibit display you know do
anything are entirely passive agents and
you may think well so what I understand
that why can't I say it anyway it's
because if you
anthropomorphize then you're going to
misinterpret things that happen you're
going to be given viruses goals when in
fact they do not and it's very important
to look at all the things we're going to
look at in terms of virology here with a
neutral attitude understanding that
these things happen randomly mutations
happen to random lis in a genome and
they may lead to something but the
viruses doesn't have a goal of infecting
people in making them sick
the only selective force for a virus is
to find a new host that is the major
selective force it's an entirely passive
force and whatever happens during
evolution to make that effective that is
selected for so try not to do this I try
not to anthropomorphize as well it's
very difficult with science writers
often do because it's very easy and the
alternative is sometimes convoluted but
it's really a warning to not think that
way don't think that viruses can
actively do things they're passive now
the other part of the definition of a
virus that I used to use was that they
were very small in fact I gave them a
limit I said they will pass through a
point to micron filter there's no more
size in the virus definition because now
we have viruses that are way bigger than
0.2 microns we have one-and-a-half
micron viruses and everything in between
so size is no longer part of the
definition but I do want to give you a
sense for the virus size here they are
very small here's an e coli at a hundred
thousand X and there is a bacteriophage
virus attached to it so you can see it's
much smaller than the e coli but you
know it's not hugely smaller here on the
in panel D is HIV particle and that see
the rod-like virus is tobacco mosaic
virus of plant virus which we will talk
about momentarily so they are relatively
large compared to e.coli and then that
little panel has a variety of objects
which are magnified to a million fold
here
and here we have carbon atom we have
tRNA and antibody molecule there's a
ribosome and some other cellular
components actin and myosin and so forth
and here's a poliovirus particle so it's
about the size of a ribosome and so on
this panel it's quite small compared to
e coli and that's not the smallest
particle so 30 nanometers is getting
there but there are viruses between 20
and 30 nanometers in diameter those are
the smallest ones we know of and so
here's the another way of looking at the
size range of virus particles first on
the bottom there is a cell with its
nucleus and various organelles a
eukaryotic cell of course and here are
some virus particles outside of it and
we've magnified them on the right and
the bigger one is a herpes virus about
200 nanometers in diameter so one of the
larger ones and there's poliovirus again
about the size of ribosomes so quite
small compared to a cell lots of these
virus particles could fit inside of a
cell on the top is an interesting scale
which goes through from the left plant
cells to atoms all the way on the right
and how you would visualize each of
these entities invite you can see
viruses fall somewhere in the middle
between bacteria and some of the smaller
components and you you typically cannot
see viruses by the light microscope a
few can be seen I'm going to show you
one in a moment but mostly you need to
use electron microscopy to see viruses
and of course everything's smaller than
that you need to use these sorts of
techniques as well this is answers the
question how many viruses could you put
on a pinhead in case you were interested
there's a pinhead which has a dust mite
there that little pink thing is a dust
mite and in the square here are a
variety of very small objects including
some red blood cells one of these is a
lymphocyte one of these is a yeast and
here we have a few bacteria
then you can barely faintly see this
long ish structure there that is a virus
that's Ebola virus it happens to be very
long so you can see it here so it's very
small with respect to the pin itself pin
is about 2,000 microns in diameter so
you could put 500 million rhinoviruses
on a pinhead those are the viruses that
cause a common cold and if you have a
common cold every time you speak you're
making a aerosol and those little
droplets are full of rhinoviruses enough
to infect many people and that's part of
the strategy for viruses to transmit
make lots of progeny and go from one
host to another now we used to think
that viruses were smaller than point two
microns I'm going to tell you why in a
moment and some of the smaller viruses
we knew about Rhino virus says it's
about the same size as polio it's about
30 nanometers HIV slightly larger and
herpes virus is about slightly larger
than HIV as I showed you but about 15
years ago a group of viruses were
discovered which we could now call giant
viruses because they were bigger than
anything we'd ever seen and one of them
is Mimi virus shown here made the cover
of American scientist and you can see
it's quite larger than any virus that we
knew here's a electron micrograph of an
infected cell with - Mimi virus
particles in it we'll talk a little bit
about giant viruses and what they mean
but they have expanded the size range
and we have even bigger viruses now this
one is the biggest I know of on the left
that is a light micrograph of this virus
Pandora virus just put it under scope in
the lab they're too much there one and a
half microns long so you can see these
in the light scope to quote Pandora
virus that's the biggest virus we know
of and the genome is 2 and 1/2 million
base pairs of DNA huge mostly encoding
genes we have never seen before and the
more viruses we discover this is
incredible more viruses we find the more
genes we find whose functions we have
never seen before the proteins don't
look anything like the proteins
we know about so it's a very exciting
time to do virus discovery because you
can find all sorts of new things there
is also a fundamental difference between
viruses and bacteria and the way they
reproduce and bacteria shown on the
lower right here you take a single
bacterium you put it in broth it starts
to divide it makes two and four and
eight binary fission right if you put a
virus in a broth it will do nothing
it needs a cell and it will get into the
cell but it will not divide it will make
parts it will make genomes and capsid
parts and assemble them and then you
have an infectious particle a
fundamentally different way of
reproducing make the parts assemble the
final product and as a consequence you
add viruses to cells you have a period
where nothing seems to happen
there's no infectious virus being made
we call that the Eclipse and then at
some point after infection it varies
depending on the virus then you see new
infectious particles made so a
fundamental difference between viruses
and bacteria so let's take a moment for
a quiz here which of the following is
true concerning bacterial versus viral
replication viruses must assemble using
preformed components bacteria do not
replicate via binary fission as viruses
do bacteria must assemble using
preformed components viruses do not have
an eclipse period and viruses replicate
by binary fission okay how do we do yes
viruses must assemble using preformed
components 91% of you got that a few of
you got the other ones but that's the
key everything else is wrong but
bacteria do replicate via binary fission
but and so therefore C is wrong as well
viruses do have an eclipse period they
do not replicate by binary fission how
old are they so we now can sequence many
many viral genomes and do computational
biology experiments to estimate
evolutionary rates
the oldest genome that I know of so far
in the literature is a retrovirus that
seems to have existed 450 million years
ago in the Ordovician period which would
be about right here where the first land
plants are emerging and it seemed to
originate in the oceans which is kind of
interesting because there you've had the
first animals fishes growing up or
evolving and then coming onto land
so maybe the virus has evolved in the
ocean and came onto land and this is one
of the interesting critters that live
then ortho Sarris lived 488 million
years ago hard to go beyond that because
the genome mutation rates of viruses are
so great that the data disintegrates
beyond a certain age and we have no
fossils of course where we can withdraw
nucleic acids from nucleic acids don't
last very long in fossils and so it's
very hard to get them there are some old
fossils but not millions and billions of
years old I happen to think that viruses
originated before cells which would be
many billions of years ago
I think the first viruses were actually
self-replicating nucleic acids which
could replicate outside of cells self
polymerizing nucleic acids this is one
of the ideas for the origin of life we
call those replicas they're replicating
nucleic acids they're essentially
viruses and from those emerged cells and
then later on the viruses said well they
didn't say of course virus has entered
cells because that was a hospitable
place we'll talk more about that when we
talk about evolution now if you start to
move through recorded history you start
to see evidence for viral infection we
didn't know what viruses were till about
the end of the 1800s but here on the
left a 700 BC Vaz where it says rabid
Hector referring to rabies virus
presumably or rabies the disease and on
the right and Egyptian carving from
these years 1580 BC where this young man
has a foot that looks exactly like what
polio myelitis is today
we call it a drop foot the muscles are
paralyzed so you cannot keep your foot
elevated it just drops we don't really
know if this is folio but it looks very
much like and there are lots of
references in history throughout the
years that suggest virus infections were
around in the 11th century we know that
in China the variolation was practiced
now at this time smallpox was ravaging
human civilizations this was a virus
that evolved from probably camels and
rodents to infect humans as the
populations of humans grew these viruses
invaded them and smallpox was
particularly devastating killed a lot of
people in China they practice a kind of
vaccination and this is in the
historical record where people with
smallpox they would take the pustules
grind them up and blow them into the
nose of someone to make them not get the
disease had no idea this was a virus of
course but they just knew that some
people who survived smallpox never got
it again so they said we will give it to
you and about a third of the people died
but the other two-thirds not an FDA
approval vaccine but they did that and
then the wife of the English ambassador
to Turkey the practice had reached
Turkey by that she noticed this and she
brought it back to England and they
started practicing variation and then in
the 1790s Edward Jenner did experiments
to establish vaccination which we'll
talk about later in the vaccine lecture
but let's talk now about the origin of
this virus concept how did it grow from
a point where we didn't know anything
about any microbe to where we now have
this concept of virus so we start with
leaven hook in in the 1600s he did he
invented the microscope and for the
first time we saw that there were things
that were living that you couldn't see
because people thought what everything I
can see that's all there is to the world
but he said Oh in water there are little
things swimming around the concept of
microbes Pasteur of course took it
further he showed
that microbes can do good things in
particular bacteria can make wine and
cheese and so forth and so at that point
we know there are bacteria there are as
microscopic organisms that can do these
things and then finally coke towards the
end of the 1800s
said these bacteria can cause disease so
we established the germ theory of
microbiology so by the end of the 1800s
we know about bacteria we know what they
can do and we know they cause disease
but we don't know anything about viruses
yet a key point here is this that we use
the word virus way before this we can
find as early as 1728 the use of virus
and the literature to describe any agent
that causes an infection so in 1728 we
don't know about bacteria but we know
that people can transmit a sickness to
each other and people started to say
well this is a virus that's doing this
because virus is a Latin name for poison
so they thought a poison was spreading
from one person to another
they thought it was some kind of liquid
that could be spread in the air when
Pastor came on the scene he decided that
every virus is a microbe remember he was
studying bacteria and he said these
bacteria or viruses they're all the same
these things that are making people sick
they're viruses so again we don't know
what a virus is yet but we're using the
name virus to explain infectious
diseases caused by bacteria a little
confusing but bear with me
he discovery this gentleman Chamberland
he was working with Pasteur and the
water they had in the lab was dirty it
was contaminated so he designed a filter
to clean it up it's called the
Chamberlain filter it has a porcelain
insert and you put water in it and you
try a suction the water goes through the
bacteria are retained on the filter so
he can make clean water and he ended up
selling this in Paris they could have
clean water
Chamberlain filter Pasteur use this in
the lab and he found that whatever it
was that caused rabies who thought it
was a bacterium went through the filter
that must be a small bacterium then and
the pores are about 0.2 microns in size
all right towards the end of the 1800s
by then people are smoking big-time
tobacco and in in Germany and other
parts of Europe there's a disease going
through that the backhoe crops called
tobacco mosaic disease it makes the
leaves blotchy like this and it impacts
the price of tobacco so people want to
know what's causing it so a couple of
scientists took the Chamberland filter
and they said it must be a bacterium so
let's grind up the leaves and filter it
but what they found was nothing stuck to
the filter the agent of the disease went
into the broth okay so one of them said
it's just a small bacterium but the
other scientist said no this is
something different and that's where the
concept of virus as a different entity
emerged they called these filterable
viruses now remember viruses are
everything they called them filterable
viruses these two individuals discovered
the tobacco mosaic disease filterable
virus again virus meaning some kind of a
liquid for many years people think that
viruses are actually liquids in 1898 the
first animal virus was discovered
foot-and-mouth disease a very important
virus of cattle which we deal with to
this day and as time went by the key
concept was not only are they small they
passed through this filter point 2
microns which we now know not all
viruses do but they will not replicate
in a broth they need a cell in which to
grow so if you take the filtrate and put
it on a tobacco leaf it will grow but if
you just incubate the filtrate by itself
the virus will not reproduce but again
at this point 1898 we still think
viruses are liquids many new viruses
come to be discovered yellow fever
rabies smallpox polio etc even up to
1933 we're not sure if they're particles
are liquids yet we're still calling them
filterable viruses and here is a nice
chart of the discovery of bacteria and
viruses acock introduces efficient
methods for working with bacteria you
see the
bacteria discovered increases and the
number of viruses also goes up and up to
1935 we're still calling them filterable
viruses but a key experiment they're
actually two key experiments that change
that the first is the development of the
electron microscope by Helmut Ruska and
Germany and that's the first e/m there
on the left
in 1939 takes a picture of a virus
infected e.coli and he sees these
particulate things on it these are
bacteria phages first picture of a
bacteria phage for the first time we
realize the virus is not a liquid it's a
particle our next question is which the
key concept first discovered about
viruses that distinguish them from other
microorganisms too large to pass through
a point might two micron filter only
replicate in broth make tobacco plants
sick small enough to pass through a
filter none of the above how do we do it
small enough to pass through a filter
that's right yeah then at this point
they're not too large to pass through a
filter today they are but back then the
key point was that they didn't they
don't replicate in broth of course they
need sales in which to replicate making
tobacco plants sick is not a key feature
another key experiment the same year as
the electron micrograph 1939 people are
doing growth curves with bacteria and
viruses remember you take that back to
your room you put it in broth it starts
to divide by binary fission if you take
a virus and infect cells there's always
this lag this Eclipse and they said it
can't be a small bacterium because
bacteria don't have this lag it has to
be something different so between the
e/m and this it was clear that a virus
was something different than a bacterium
so they stopped calling them filterable
viruses they were just viruses now so we
had viruses and bacteria that were
agents of disease so there's a little
convoluted history there but I wanted
you to know that our current day
understanding a virus wasn't always that
way and if you happen to look in the
literature and see this in the old
they were talking about something else
nowadays we know lots of information
about viruses we take pictures of a
variety of them using the electron
micrograph here's a bacteriophage a
particular type that has a lovely tail
and tail fibers tobacco mosaic virus the
one that started all of this the one
that caused this disease
rabies virus and a virus that causes
gastroenteritis we know great details
about many viruses we can solve their
three-dimensional structures we can't
know where every atom is in the virus
particle this is a two different views
of poliovirus one of the viruses I've
spent most of my career working on we
know the chemical formula for the virus
because we know how many atoms it has
and on the left is a very
high-resolution three-dimensional
structure where we can locate every atom
in three dimensions and on the right the
lower resolution we'll talk about how we
get these later and what they mean this
is the virus that I carry on my cell
phone
this is poliovirus with its receptor and
I do know other people with viruses on
their phone but not that kind we
classify viruses to make sense out of
them not because there's any natural
organization but because humans like to
classify things and I often refer to
classification throughout this course so
I want you to understand what I'm
talking about we classify viruses today
mainly by the sequence we sequence the
genome and we say oh it's this virus
that's how the new virus in China was
identified from one of the patients the
isolated virus they sequence the entire
genome about 15,000 bases put it in a
computer do a phylogenetic tree and boom
it's a corona virus similar to SARS
virus because you can see exactly on the
tree so that is how we classify viruses
and of course we get something new that
we've never seen we have nowhere to put
it on the tree and it exists on its own
until new relatives come in the old days
we used to use other criteria like the
shell the membrane the dimensions but we
really don't use those for
classification any longer
we use the classical hierarchical system
of classification which you've probably
encountered in other organisms we start
with orders in this course I'll mainly
be talking about virus families they all
end in viridi so for example the Ebola
viruses are part of the filo viridi or
the phyllo virus family
then we go into general in this case
Ebola virus and then virus species so I
want you to understand when I say feel a
Verity or a corner of your idioms
talking about the family level and so
forth virus discovery is no longer
driven by disease of course when disease
occurs we'd like to know if a virus was
involved but a great deal of biology now
is to know what's out there and how it
affects eco systems and here's a great
experiment from a few years ago where a
number of research groups isolated 220
different invertebrate species these are
all collected in China you can see
various insects crustaceans worms
mollusks and so forth and they just
ground them up and asked what viruses we
find by sequencing complete sequencing
and in each of these organisms each of
these species they found new viruses in
the RNA viruses are in orange here on
the top you could see lots of new RNA
viruses in each of these and most of
them are new things that we had never
seen before and so this drives virus
discovery now the ability to sequence
very quickly many genomes and know
what's there now what you may ask why do
we care about all this other stuff out
there why don't we just focus on the
viruses that cause disease well here are
some reasons first of all I said earlier
that viruses outnumber cellular life by
at least ten to one they have the
greatest to biodiversity on the planet
and we know that viruses exchange genes
not only with each other but with their
hosts so that's important and we need to
know about that they drive global
biogeochemical cycles we're going to
have a lecture on ecology this year
the first time to see how viruses
interact with the broader global
ecosystems and we'll see how they're so
important for the recycling of many
nutrients as I also alluded to they can
be beneficial so we want to know what
virus is out there are beneficial for
example there are some newly discovered
viruses that only infect insects that
are now being used as a vaccine platform
in humans so you'd never know where the
good for us is going to come from and
finally we do want to know what's out
there because the next pathogen could be
out there this new corona virus in China
is not a surprise
people have been sequencing viruses in
bats throughout China for many years and
find lots of related corona viruses so
we knew the opportunity for spillover
from what will probably be a bat into
humans was there and that's another
reason why we do this now you may think
that this is all very complicated but in
fact in the next two lectures I'm going
to tell you that this can be simplified
because of these two facts first genomes
are obligate molecular parasites they
have to get inside of a cell and once
they're in the cell they have to be
translated by the host translational
machinery so we're going to use that to
take these billions and billions of
viruses and simplify them
mechanistically so you can understand
how they work so next time we are going
to talk about the infectious cycle that
is what happens when a virus gets into a
cell all the way to reproducing how does
that work and how do we study it
[Music]